<!--
================================================================
doc/docbook/development/development.dbk
$Id: development.dbk 13771 2020-01-04 22:46:00Z vruppert $

This is the top level file for the Bochs Developers Manual.
================================================================
-->
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook V4.1//EN" [

<!-- include definitions that are common to all Bochs documentation -->
<!ENTITY % bochsdefs SYSTEM "../include/defs.sgm">
%bochsdefs;

]>
<book>
<bookinfo>
   <title>Bochs Developers Guide</title>
   <authorgroup>
   <author><firstname>Kevin</firstname><surname>Lawton</surname></author>
   <author><firstname>Bryce</firstname><surname>Denney</surname></author>
   <author><firstname>Christophe</firstname><surname>Bothamy</surname></author>
   <editor><firstname>Michael</firstname><surname>Calabrese</surname></editor>
   </authorgroup>
</bookinfo>

<!-- *************************************************************** -->
<chapter id="resources"><title>Resources for developers</title>
<para>
The development guide describes resources that are intended for developers
in particular.  Many Bochs resources are also covered in the User Guide,
including compile instructions, bochsrc options, how to find the mailing
lists, etc.
</para>

<section id="svn-write-access-setup"><title>Setting up SVN write access</title>
<para>
If you are an official SourceForge developer, then you can use SVN with write
access.  The SVN contains the most recent copy of the source code, and with
write access you can upload any changes you make to the SVN server for others
to use. The SVN checkout command is identical to the one for normal users, but
you might want to get the whole tree to work with branches and tags.
</para>

<screen>
  <command>svn co https://svn.code.sf.net/p/bochs/code bochs-svn</command>
</screen>

<para>
Depending on your network connection this may take a long time, since it downloads all
files from all branches and tags that exist in the repository at the current revision.
</para>

</section> <!-- end setting up svn write access -->

<section id="using-svn-write-access"><title>Using SVN write access</title>

<section><title>Checking in files</title>
<para>
Once you have a Bochs directory, you can compile the files, edit them, test them, etc.
See the documentation section, <ulink url="../user/get-src-svn.html">Tracking the source code with SVN</ulink>
for more info on SVN, in the User Manual. But what's new and different is that
you can now do SVN commits. When a file is all fixed and ready to share with the rest of
the world, you run a commit command to upload your version to the server.
First, it's good to do a SVN update to make sure nobody else has changed it
since you downloaded it last. At the first commit you'll always have to specify your
SF username and type your password.
</para>

<screen>
  $ svn update file.cc
  $ svn commit --username <replaceable>sfusername</replaceable> file.cc
  [editor opens. type log message, save, and exit.]
  Login area: &lt;https://svn.code.sf.net:443&gt; SourceForge Subversion area
  Username: <replaceable>sfusername</replaceable>
  Password for '<replaceable>sfusername</replaceable>': <replaceable><--type your password</replaceable>
  Sending        file.cc
  Transmitting file data .
  Committed revision 10.
</screen>

<para>
When SVN starts an editor, The default is usually vi. If you want a different
editor, set the EDITOR environment variable to the name of your preferred
editor.  When you're done, just save the file and quit the editor.  Unless
there's some problem, you will see a message that says what the new SVN revision
number is, and then "done".  If while you're editing the log message, you decide
that you don't want to commit after all, don't save the file. Quit the editor,
and when it asks where the log message went, tell it to abort.
</para>

<para>
Here is an example of a successful checkin:

<screen>
  $ svn commit misc.txt
  [edit log msg]
  Sending        misc.txt
  Transmitting file data .
  Committed revision 6.
</screen>

And here is an aborted one:

<screen>
  $ svn commit misc.txt
  [quit editor without saving]
  Log message unchanged or not specified
  a)bort, c)ontinue, e)dit:
  a
</screen>

</para>
</section> <!--end of "Checking in Files" -->

<section><title>Creating a backup of the SVN repository</title>
<para>
Backups of the SVN repository can be made with the <command>rsync</command> utility.
In case of data corruption or other problems on the server, the repository with all
revisions, branches and tags can be restored easily. It is recommended to update this
backup frequently. The following example creates a folder called
<filename>bochs-svn-rsync</filename> that contains the repository.
<screen>
  rsync -av svn.code.sf.net::p/bochs/code bochs-svn-rsync
</screen>
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Setting SVN commit notifications</title>
<para>
The Bochs SVN repository is set up to send a notification email to the "bochs-cvs"
mailing list after each successful commit. This email contains the log message, a list
of the modified files and a diff against the previous revision. The diff of large
commits will be truncated at 96 kByte.
</para>
<para>
After each commit the SVN server runs the script <command>post-commit</command> located
in the <filename>hooks</filename> folder. On SourceForge, this script forces a refresh
of the Allura code browser and it can call a script <command>post-commit-user</command>
for addition operations if it exists. For Bochs we have set up this script and call
<command>svnnotify</command> from it to create the notification email.
<screen>
#!/bin/sh

svnnotify --repos-path $1 --revision $2 -O -C -d -e 98304 -t bochs-cvs@lists.sourceforge.net
</screen>
</para>
</section>

</section> <!--end of "Using SVN write access" -->

<section id="other"><title>Ideas for other sections</title>
<para>
<screen>
Ideas:
- how to browse code with the Allura code browser
- how to find an identifier, variable, or specific text in the code
- how to make patches with SVN
</screen>
</para>
</section>

</chapter>

<chapter id="about-the-code"><title>About the code</title>

<section id="code-overview"><title>Overview</title>
<para>
The initial versions of some sections in this chapter are based on a document
written by Peter "Firefly" Lund. It was added and updated in January 2006.
</para>
<para>
The Bochs virtual PC consists of many pieces of hardware. At a bare minimum
there are always a CPU, a PIT (Programmable Interval Timer), a PIC
(Programmable Interrupt Controller), a DMA controller, some memory (this
includes both RAM and BIOS ROMs), a video card (usually VGA), a keyboard port
(also handles the mouse), an RTC with battery backed NVRAM, and some extra
motherboard circuitry.
</para>
<para>
There might also be an ethernet card, a PCI controller, a soundcard,
an IDE controller (+ harddisks/CDROM), a SCSI controller (+ harddisks), a
floppy controller, an APIC ...
</para>
<para>
There may also be more than one CPU.
</para>
<para>
Most of these pieces of hardware have their own C++ class - and if Bochs is
configured to have more than one piece of a type of hardware, each will have
its own object.
</para>
<para>
The pieces of hardware communicates over a couple of buses with each other -
some of the things that the buses carry are reads and writes in memory space,
reads and writes in I/O space, interrupt requests, interrupt acknowledges, DMA
requests, DMA acknowledges, and NMI request/acknowledge. How that is simulated
is explained later.&FIXME;
</para>
<para>
In addition to the simulator itself, some other components are required for
the communication with the user. The most important parts are these:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>the window that simulates the monitor and receives keyboard / mouse events</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the configuration interface that allows to adjust simulation settings</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the simulator interface for the communication between the other componnents</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the parameter tree (for configuration settings and save/restore)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the logfunctions class (handle and configure panic/error/info/debug)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
These componnents of Bochs are optional:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>the plugin interface</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the builtin debugger</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the disassembler</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the instrumentation feature</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
<para>
The simulation window is handled by the GUI object (other terms used in the
sources are "display library", "VGAW"). There are many different but compatible
implementations of the GUI object, depending on whether you compile for X (Unix/Linux),
Win32, Macintosh (two versions: one for Mac OS X and one for older OS's), Amiga,
etc. The cross-platform libraries SDL and wxWidgets are also supported.
</para>
<para>
For the configuration interface there are also some different implementations: textconfig
(text menus only), wxdialog (wxWidgets port), win32dialog/win32paramdlg (Windows port).
</para>
</section>

<section id="directory-structure"><title>Directory Structure</title>
<para>
<table>
<title>Directory structure</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Location</entry>
<entry>Meaning</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row><entry>bios</entry><entry>System and VGA BIOS images, system BIOS sources and makefile</entry></row>
<row><entry>build</entry><entry>additional stuff required for building Bochs on different platforms</entry></row>
<row><entry>bx_debug</entry><entry>the builtin Bochs debugger</entry></row>
<row><entry>cpu</entry><entry>the cpu emulation sources</entry></row>
<row><entry>cpu/avx</entry><entry>sources for emulating AVX instructions</entry></row>
<row><entry>cpu/cpudb</entry><entry>sources for emulating different cpu models</entry></row>
<row><entry>cpu/fpu</entry><entry>the fpu emulation sources</entry></row>
<row><entry>disasm</entry><entry>the disassembler for the Bochs debugger</entry></row>
<row><entry>doc/docbook</entry><entry>the Bochs documentation in DocBook format</entry></row>
<row><entry>doc/man</entry><entry>Bochs manual pages</entry></row>
<row><entry>docs-html</entry><entry>old Bochs documentation in HTML (will be replaced by DocBook)</entry></row>
<row><entry>gui</entry><entry>display libraries (guis), the simulator interface and text mode config interface</entry></row>
<row><entry>gui/bitmaps</entry><entry>bitmaps for the headerbar</entry></row>
<row><entry>gui/font</entry><entry>the default VGA font used by most of the display libraries</entry></row>
<row><entry>gui/keymaps</entry><entry>keymaps for the keyboard mapping feature</entry></row>
<row><entry>host</entry><entry>host specific drivers (currently only used by the pcidev kernel module for Linux)</entry></row>
<row><entry>instrument</entry><entry>directory tree for the instrumentation feature</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev</entry><entry>standard PC devices, PCI core devices</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev/display</entry><entry>display adapters (vga, cirrus, voodoo)</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev/hdimage</entry><entry>support for different disk image types and lowlevel cdrom access</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev/networking</entry><entry>networking devices and lowlevel modules</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev/sound</entry><entry>sound devices and lowlevel modules</entry></row>
<row><entry>iodev/usb</entry><entry>USB HCs and pluggable devices</entry></row>
<row><entry>memory</entry><entry>memory management and ROM loader</entry></row>
<row><entry>misc</entry><entry>useful utilities (e.g. bximage, niclist)</entry></row>
<row><entry>misc/sb16</entry><entry>tool to control the SB16 emulation from the guest side</entry></row>
<row><entry>patches</entry><entry>pending patches</entry></row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
</section>

<section id="emulator-objects"><title>Emulator Objects</title>
<section><title>Weird macros and other mysteries</title>
<para>
Bochs has many macros with inscrutable names. One might even go as far as to
say that Bochs is macro infested.
Some of them are gross speed hacks, to cover up the slow speed that C++ causes.
Others paper over differences between the simulated PC configurations.
Many of the macros exhibit the same problem as C++ does: too much stuff happens
behind the programmer's back. More explicitness would be a big win.
</para>
</section>
<section id="static-methods-hack"><title>Static methods hack</title>
<para>
C++ methods have an invisible parameter called the this pointer - otherwise the
method wouldn't know which object to operate on. In many cases in Bochs, there
will only ever be one object - so this flexibility is unnecessary. There is a
hack that can be enabled by #defining BX_USE_CPU_SMF to 1 in <filename>config.h
</filename> that makes most methods static, which means they have a "special
relationship" with the class they are declared in but apart from that are
normal C functions with no hidden parameters. Of course they still need access
to the internals of an object, so the single object of their class has a globally
visible name that these functions use. It is all hidden with macros.
</para>
<para>
Declaration of a class, from iodev/pic.h:
</para>
<screen>
...
#if BX_USE_PIC_SMF
#  define BX_PIC_SMF  static
#  define BX_PIC_THIS thePic->
#else
#  define BX_PIC_SMF
#  define BX_PIC_THIS this->
#endif
...
class bx_pic_c : public bx_pic_stub_c {

public:
  bx_pic_c();
  ~bx_pic_c();
...
  BX_PIC_SMF void   service_master_pic(void);
  BX_PIC_SMF void   service_slave_pic(void);
  BX_PIC_SMF void   clear_highest_interrupt(bx_pic_t *pic);
};
</screen>
<para>
And iodev/pic.cc:
</para>
<screen>
...
#define LOG_THIS thePic->

bx_pic_c *thePic = NULL;
...
void bx_pic_c::service_master_pic(void)
{
  Bit8u unmasked_requests;
  int irq;
  Bit8u isr, max_irq;
  Bit8u highest_priority = BX_PIC_THIS s.master_pic.lowest_priority + 1;
  if(highest_priority > 7)
    highest_priority = 0;

  if (BX_PIC_THIS s.master_pic.INT) { /* last interrupt still not acknowleged */
    return;
  }

  isr = BX_PIC_THIS s.master_pic.isr;
  if (BX_PIC_THIS s.master_pic.special_mask) {
    /* all priorities may be enabled.  check all IRR bits except ones
     * which have corresponding ISR bits set
     */
    max_irq = highest_priority;
  }
  else { /* normal mode */
    /* Find the highest priority IRQ that is enabled due to current ISR */
    max_irq = highest_priority;
...
}
...
</screen>
<para>
Ugly, isn't it? If we use static methods, methods prefixed with BX_PIC_SMF are
declared static and references to fields inside the object, which are prefixed
with BX_PIC_THIS, will use the globally visible object, thePic->. If we don't
use static methods, BX_PIC_SMF evaluates to nothing and BX_PIC_THIS becomes this->.
Making it evaluate to nothing would be a lot cleaner, but then the scoping rules
would change slightly between the two Bochs configurations, which would be a load
of bugs just waiting to happen. Some classes use BX_SMF, others have their own
version of the macro, like BX_PIC_SMF above.
</para>
</section>
<section id="cpu-mem-objects"><title>CPU und memory objects in UP/SMP configurations</title>
<para>
The CPU class is a special case of the above: if Bochs is simulating a uni-
processor machine then there is obviously only one bx_cpu_c object and the
static methods trick can be used. If, on the other hand, Bochs is simulating an
smp machine then we can't use the trick. The same seems to be true for memory:
for some reason, we have a memory object for each CPU object. This might become
relevant for NUMA machines, but they are not all that common -- and even the
existing IA-32 NUMA machines bend over backwards to hide that fact: it should
only be visible in slightly worse timing for non-local memory and non-local
peripherals. Other than that, the memory map and device map presented to each
CPU will be identical.
</para>
<para>
In a UP configuration, the CPU object is declared as bx_cpu. In an SMP
configuration it will be an array of pointers to CPU objects (bx_cpu_array[]).
For memory that would be bx_mem and bx_mem_array[], respectively.
Each CPU object contains a pointer to its associated memory object.
Access of a CPU object often goes through the BX_CPU(x) macro, which either
ignores the parameter and evaluates to &amp;bx_cpu, or evaluates to bx_cpu_array
[n], so the result will always be a pointer. The same goes for BX_MEM(x).
If static methods are used then BX_CPU_THIS_PTR evaluates to BX_CPU(0)->. Ugly,
isn't it?
</para>
</section>
<section id="config-parameter-tree"><title>The configuration parameter tree</title>
<para>
Starting with version 1.3, the Bochs configuration parameters are stored in parameter
objects. These objects have get/set methods with min/max checks and it is possible
to define parameter handlers to perform side effects and to override settings.
Each parameter type has it's own object type with specific features (numeric,
boolean, enum, string and file name). A special object type containing a list of
parameters is designed for building and managing configuration menus or dialogs
automatically. In the original implementation the parameters could be accessed
only with their unique id from a static list or a special structure containing
pointers to all parameters.
</para>
<para>
Starting with version 2.3, the Bochs parameter object handling has been rewritten
to a parameter tree. There is now a root list containing child lists, and these
lists can contain lists or parameters and so on. The parameters are now accessed
by a name build from all the list names in the path and finally the parameter
name separated by periods.
<screen>
Bit32u megs = SIM->get_param_num("memory.standard.ram.size")->get();
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The example above shows how to get the memory size in megabytes from the simulator
interface. In the root list (".") there is child list named "memory" containing
a child list "standard". It's child list "ram" contains the numeric parameter type
"size". The SIM->get_param_num() methods returns the object pointer and the get()
method returns the parameter value.
</para>
<para>
The table below shows all parameter types used by the Bochs configuration interface.
<table>
<title>Parameter types</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Type</entry>
<entry>Description</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry>bx_object_c</entry>
<entry>Base class for all the other parameter types. It contains the unique parameter id and the object type value.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_c</entry>
<entry>Generic parameter class. It contains the name, label, description and the input/output formats.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_num_c</entry>
<entry>Numerical (decimal/hex) config settings are stored in this parameter type.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_bool_c</entry>
<entry>This parameter type is based on bx_param_num_c, but it is designed for boolean values. A dependency
list can be defined to enable/disable other parameters depending on the value change.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_enum_c</entry>
<entry>Based on bx_param_num_c this parameter type contains a list of valid values.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_string_c</entry>
<entry>Configuration strings are stored in this type of parameter.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_param_filename_c</entry>
<entry>Based on bx_param_string_c this parameter type is used for file names.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_list_c</entry>
<entry>Contains a list of pointers to parameters (bx_param_*_c and bx_list_c).
In the config interface it is used for menus/dialogs.</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
</section>
<section id="save-restore"><title>The save/restore feature</title>
<para>
The save/restore feature is based on an extension to the parameter tree concept.
A subtree (list) called "bochs" appears in the root of the parameter tree
and some new "shadow" parameter types store pointers to values instead of the values
itself. All the hardware objects have register_state() methods to register pointers
to the device registers and switches that need to be saved. The simulator interface
saves the registered data in text format to the specified folder (usually one file
per item in the save/restore list). Large binary arrays are registered with a
special parameter type, so they are saved as separate files. The filename is then
created from the full parameter path without the prefix "bochs.".
</para>
<para>
The table below shows the additional parameter types for save/restore.
<table>
<title>Save/restore parameter types</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Type</entry>
<entry>Description</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row>
<entry>bx_shadow_num_c</entry>
<entry>Based on bx_param_num_c this type stores a pointer to a numerical variable.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_shadow_bool_c</entry>
<entry>This parameter type stores a pointer to a boolean variable (bit #0 only) or
a numerical one (only one selected bit).</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_shadow_data_c</entry>
<entry>This special parameter type stores pointer size of a binary array. The data is
saved in a separate file and the text file uses the file name as the value.</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>bx_shadow_filedata_c</entry>
<entry>This special parameter type stores the descriptor of an open file
(added in Bochs 2.5).</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
<para>
It is also possible to use the bx_param_num_c object with parameter save/restore
handlers. With this special way several device settings can be saved to and restored
from one single parameter. The disk image state is also handled this way (see below).
</para>
<para>
All devices can uses these two save/restore specific methods:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>register_state() is called after the device init() to register the device members for save/restore</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>after_restore_state() is an optional method to do things directly after restore (e.g. vga: force a display update)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
<para>
To implement save/restore for hard drive images, the new method register_state() has
been added to the base class of the disk image objects. It creates a bx_param_bool_c
object called "image" and installs static save and restore handlers. The save
operation finally sets the parameter's value (1 = success) and the save/restore
handlers are doing the main job. The static handlers call the class-specific code.
Depending on the image "mode" they copy either the whole image file or the file
containing changes (journal). The files are saved similar to binary arrays with
the same naming convention. The restore methods are doing some format or coherency
checks, close the open image, copy the file(s) and finally re-open the image.
</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="configure-scripting"><title>Configure Scripting</title>
<para>
Like many other open source projects, Bochs uses a configure script created with
<command>autoconf</command>. The configure script generates all makefiles and a
set of header and support files from templates.
</para>
<para>
This example shows how to add an option to the template file <filename>configure.in</filename>.
The resulting configure script sets up symbols like <option>BX_SUPPORT_BUSMOUSE</option>
in the output file <filename>config.h</filename> and replaces <option>@BUSM_OBJS@</option>
entries in the makefile output.
<screen>
BUSM_OBJS=''
AC_MSG_CHECKING(for Busmouse support)
AC_ARG_ENABLE(busmouse,
  AS_HELP_STRING([--enable-busmouse], [enable Busmouse support (InPort)]),
  [if test "$enableval" = yes; then
    AC_MSG_RESULT(yes)
    AC_DEFINE(BX_SUPPORT_BUSMOUSE, 1)
    BUSM_OBJS='busmouse.o'
   else
    AC_MSG_RESULT(no)
    AC_DEFINE(BX_SUPPORT_BUSMOUSE, 0)
   fi],
  [
    AC_DEFINE(BX_SUPPORT_BUSMOUSE, 0)
    AC_MSG_RESULT(no)]
  )
AC_SUBST(BUSM_OBJS)
</screen>
</para>
<para>
These output files are generated by the configure script in addition to the makefiles.
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><filename>config.h</filename> - the main header file</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>ltdlconf.h</filename> - header file required for compiling with libtool</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>bxversion.h</filename> - header file containing version strings</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>bxversion.rc</filename> - resource file for Windows with version information</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>build/linux/bochs-dlx</filename> - DLX Linux shortcut script (Linux only)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>build/macosx/Info.plist</filename> - property list file for MacOSX</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><filename>build/win32/nsis/bochs.nsi</filename> - NSIS script for creating Windows installer package</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</section>

<section id="logfunctions"><title>Log Functions</title>
<para>
The <emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis> class is one of the base classes of Bochs.
It supports 4 log levels (debug, info, error, panic) and 4 possible "actions"
that can be done when a log event occurs. Most of the higher level C++ classes of Bochs
inherit this class to make the logging configuration per object (here called "module")
possible. In the Bochs sources the log events appear as macros (BX_DEBUG, BX_INFO,
BX_ERROR, BX_PANIC) and they call the related logfunction methods, unless the
symbol BX_NO_LOGGING is set to 1. This is the definition in <emphasis>bochs.h</emphasis>:
<screen>
typedef class BOCHSAPI logfunctions
{
  char *name;
  char *prefix;
  int onoff[N_LOGLEV];
  class iofunctions *logio;
  // default log actions for all devices, declared and initialized
  // in logio.cc.
  BOCHSAPI_CYGONLY static int default_onoff[N_LOGLEV];
public:
  logfunctions(void);
  logfunctions(class iofunctions *);
 ~logfunctions(void);

  void info(const char *fmt, ...)   BX_CPP_AttrPrintf(2, 3);
  void error(const char *fmt, ...)  BX_CPP_AttrPrintf(2, 3);
  void panic(const char *fmt, ...)  BX_CPP_AttrPrintf(2, 3);
  void ldebug(const char *fmt, ...) BX_CPP_AttrPrintf(2, 3);
  void fatal (const char *prefix, const char *fmt, va_list ap, int exit_status);
  void ask (int level, const char *prefix, const char *fmt, va_list ap);
  void put(const char *p);
  void put(const char *n, const char *p);
  void setio(class iofunctions *);
  void setonoff(int loglev, int value) {
    assert (loglev >= 0 && loglev < N_LOGLEV);
    onoff[loglev] = value;
  }
  const char *get_name() const { return name; }
  const char *getprefix() const { return prefix; }
  int getonoff(int level) const {
    assert (level>=0 && level&lt;N_LOGLEV);
    return onoff[level];
  }
  static void set_default_action(int loglev, int action) {
    assert (loglev >= 0 && loglev &lt; N_LOGLEV);
    assert (action >= 0 && action &lt; N_ACT);
    default_onoff[loglev] = action;
  }
  static int get_default_action(int loglev) {
    assert (loglev >= 0 && loglev &lt; N_LOGLEV);
    return default_onoff[loglev];
  }
} logfunc_t;
</screen>
</para>
<section><title>Methods</title>
<para>
Here is a short description of some <emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis> methods.
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>constructor</emphasis> registers a new log module with default values.
The module's log prefix is empty and the log levels are set up with default actions.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>destructor</emphasis> removes the log module from the table.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>info()</emphasis>, <emphasis>error()</emphasis>, <emphasis>panic()</emphasis>
and <emphasis>ldebug()</emphasis> methods are called via macros to create a log event
of the related level.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>fatal()</emphasis> method is called if a log event occurs and it's
action is set to "fatal". It is used to shut down the Bochs simulation.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>ask()</emphasis> method is called if a log event occurs and it's
action is set to "ask". It sends an event to the simulator interface and depending
on the return value the simulation continues or it is terminated by calling
<emphasis>fatal()</emphasis>. The simulator interface either prompts the user on
the console or calls some platform / gui specific code to handle the
<emphasis>ask</emphasis> request.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>put()</emphasis> methods are used to set up the log module prefix in
that appears in the log file and the log module name that appears in the config
interface. If the name is not specified, the prefix is used instead.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>setio()</emphasis> method sets up the <emphasis>iofunctions</emphasis>
class for the log file output. This method is only used by the <emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis>
constructors.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>getonoff()</emphasis> and <emphasis>setonoff()</emphasis> methods
are used by the config interface to display and change the log actions for a
Bochs facility.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>get_default_action()</emphasis> and <emphasis>set_default_action()</emphasis>
methods are also used by the config interface to set up the default action for a
log level.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
The <emphasis>get_name()</emphasis> and <emphasis>getprefix()</emphasis> methods return
the strings set up with the <emphasis>put()</emphasis> method. The config interface
is also using them to build the menu / dialog to set up the log functions.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="timers"><title>Internal timers</title>
<section><title>Overview</title>
<para>
The Bochs internal timers are required to provide timer features in the device
emulation and for the interaction between simulator and gui. They are implemented
in the <emphasis>bx_pc_system_c</emphasis> class and driven by the cpu. When
programming a timer the interval is specified in useconds and the timer code
translates the value to cpu ticks using the <ulink url="../user/bochsrc.html#BOCHSOPT-CPU-IPS">IPS</ulink>
value. In the original implementation the cpu object calls a timer method to increment
the system time by one tick after completing one instruction. If a timer has
expired, the related timer handler function is called. Now it is also possible
to execute a number of cpu instructions, finally update the timer subsystem
with this number and possibly call several timer handlers. Here are some
examples for timers in the devices and gui code:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>the PIT (i82C54) system timer at 18.2 Hz</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the CMOS RTC one-second-timer</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the display update timer (set up with "vga: update_freq=X")</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the devices timer (polls keyboard/mouse events from the gui every 1 emulated msecond)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the LED auto-off timer (indicating data transfer for min 0.5 seconds)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>the synchronization timers (realtime/slowdown) are also based on the standard timers</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
<para>
These are the capabilities of the Bochs internal timers:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>register / unregister at runtime</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>activate / deactivate at runtime</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>timer period changeable</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>one-shot or continuous mode</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Timer definitions, members and methods</title>
<para>
Here are the timer-related definitions and members in <filename>pc_system.h</filename>:
<screen>
#define BX_MAX_TIMERS 64
#define BX_NULL_TIMER_HANDLE 10000

typedef void (*bx_timer_handler_t)(void *);

  struct {
    bx_bool inUse;      // Timer slot is in-use (currently registered).
    Bit64u  period;     // Timer periodocity in cpu ticks.
    Bit64u  timeToFire; // Time to fire next (in absolute ticks).
    bx_bool active;     // 0=inactive, 1=active.
    bx_bool continuous; // 0=one-shot timer, 1=continuous periodicity.
    bx_timer_handler_t funct;  // A callback function for when the
                               //   timer fires.
    void *this_ptr;            // The this-> pointer for C++ callbacks
                               //   has to be stored as well.
#define BxMaxTimerIDLen 32
    char id[BxMaxTimerIDLen];  // String ID of timer.
    Bit32u param;              // Device-specific value assigned to timer (optional)
  } timer[BX_MAX_TIMERS];

  unsigned   numTimers;  // Number of currently allocated timers.
  unsigned   triggeredTimer;  // ID of the actually triggered timer.
  Bit32u     currCountdown; // Current countdown ticks value (decrements to 0).
  Bit32u     currCountdownPeriod; // Length of current countdown period.
  Bit64u     ticksTotal; // Num ticks total since start of emulator execution.
  Bit64u     lastTimeUsec; // Last sequentially read time in usec.
  Bit64u     usecSinceLast; // Number of useconds claimed since then.

  // A special null timer is always inserted in the timer[0] slot.  This
  // make sure that at least one timer is always active, and that the
  // duration is always less than a maximum 32-bit integer, so a 32-bit
  // counter can be used for the current countdown.
  static const Bit64u NullTimerInterval;
  static void nullTimer(void* this_ptr);
</screen>
</para>
<para>
These are the public timer-related methods for timer control, driving the timers
with the cpu and retrieving the internal time implemented in the <emphasis>bx_pc_system_c</emphasis>
class:
<screen>
  void   initialize(Bit32u ips);
  int    register_timer(void *this_ptr, bx_timer_handler_t, Bit32u useconds,
                         bx_bool continuous, bx_bool active, const char *id);
  bx_bool unregisterTimer(unsigned timerID);
  void   setTimerParam(unsigned timerID, Bit32u param);
  void   start_timers(void);
  void   activate_timer(unsigned timer_index, Bit32u useconds, bx_bool continuous);
  void   deactivate_timer(unsigned timer_index);
  unsigned triggeredTimerID(void) {
    return triggeredTimer;
  }
  Bit32u triggeredTimerParam(void) {
    return timer[triggeredTimer].param;
  }
  static BX_CPP_INLINE void tick1(void) {
    if (--bx_pc_system.currCountdown == 0) {
      bx_pc_system.countdownEvent();
    }
  }
  static BX_CPP_INLINE void tickn(Bit32u n) {
    while (n >= bx_pc_system.currCountdown) {
      n -= bx_pc_system.currCountdown;
      bx_pc_system.currCountdown = 0;
      bx_pc_system.countdownEvent();
      // bx_pc_system.currCountdown is adjusted to new value by countdownevent().
    }
    // 'n' is not (or no longer) >= the countdown size.  We can just decrement
    // the remaining requested ticks and continue.
    bx_pc_system.currCountdown -= n;
  }

  int register_timer_ticks(void* this_ptr, bx_timer_handler_t, Bit64u ticks,
                           bx_bool continuous, bx_bool active, const char *id);
  void activate_timer_ticks(unsigned index, Bit64u instructions,
                            bx_bool continuous);
  Bit64u time_usec();
  Bit64u time_usec_sequential();
  static BX_CPP_INLINE Bit64u time_ticks() {
    return bx_pc_system.ticksTotal +
      Bit64u(bx_pc_system.currCountdownPeriod - bx_pc_system.currCountdown);
  }

  static BX_CPP_INLINE Bit32u  getNumCpuTicksLeftNextEvent(void) {
    return bx_pc_system.currCountdown;
  }
</screen>
</para>
<para>
This private method is called when the function handling the clock ticks finds
that an event has occurred:
<screen>
  void   countdownEvent(void);
</screen>
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Detailed functional description</title>
<para>
The Bochs timer implementation requires at least one timer to be active. That's why
there is a so-called <function>nullTimer</function> to make it work. It is
initialized in the constructor on the first timer slot with the highest possible
timer interval and it's handler is an empty function.
</para>
<para>
The most important variables of the timer subsystem are initialized on startup
with the <function>nullTimer</function> values and updated after each timer
modification (register / unregister / activate / deactivate / processing
handler).
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>ticksTotal</emphasis>: number of ticks total from emulator
startup to the last update of timer subsystem</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>currCountdownPeriod</emphasis>: length of the period
from <emphasis>ticksTotal</emphasis> to the next timer event</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><emphasis>currCountdown</emphasis>: number of ticks remaining
until the next timer event occurs</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
The number if ticks since emulator startup is calculated with the formula
<emphasis>ticksTotal + currCountdownPeriod - currCountdown</emphasis> and
returned with the <function>time_ticks()</function> method. The number of
useconds since emulator startup is returned with the <function>time_usec()</function>
method computed from the return value of <function>time_ticks()</function> and
the <ulink url="../user/bochsrc.html#BOCHSOPT-CPU-IPS">IPS</ulink> value.
</para>
<para>
&FIXME; To be continued
</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="cmos-map"><title>Bochs's CMOS map</title>
<para>
In addition to the default CMOS RAM layout, the Bochs BIOS uses some additional
registers for harddisk parameters and the boot sequence. The following table
shows all CMOS registers and their meaning.
</para>
<para>
<screen>
Legend:
S	- set by the emulator (Bochs)
Q	- set by the emulator (Qemu)
B	- set by the bios
U	- unused by the bios

LOC	NOTES	MEANING
0x00	S	rtc seconds
0x01	B	second alarm
0x02	S	rtc minutes
0x03	B	minute alarm
0x04	S	rtc hours
0x05	B	hour alarm

0x06	S,U	day of week
0x07	S,B	date of month
0x08	S,B	month
0x09	S,B	year

0x0a	S,B	status register A
0x0b	S,B	status register B
0x0c	S	status register C
0x0d	S	status register D

0x0f	S	shutdown status
    values:
	0x00: normal startup
	0x09: normal
	0x0d+: normal
	0x05: eoi ?
	else: unimpl

0x10	S	fd drive type (2 nibbles: high=fd0, low=fd1)
    values:
	1: 360K 5.25"
	2: 1.2MB 5.25"
	3: 720K 3.5"
	4: 1.44MB 3.5"
	5: 2.88MB 3.5"

!0x11	configuration bits!!

0x12	S	how many disks first (hd type)

!0x13	advanced configuration bits!!

0x14	S,U	equipment byte (?)
	bits	where		what
	7-6	floppy.cc
	5-4	vga.cc		0 = vga
	2	keyboard.cc	1 = enabled
	0	floppy.cc

0x15	S,U	base memory - low
0x16	S,U	base memory - high

0x17	S,U	extended memory in k - low
0x18	S,U	extended memory in k - high

0x19	S	hd0: extended type
0x1a	S	hd1: extended type

0x1b	S,U	hd0:cylinders - low
0x1c	S,U	hd0:cylinders - high
0x1d	S,U	hd0:heads
0x1e	S,U	hd0:write pre-comp - low
0x1f	S,U	hd0:write pre-comp - high
0x20	S,U	hd0:retries/bad_map/heads>8
0x21	S,U	hd0:landing zone - low
0x22	S,U	hd0:landing zone - high
0x23	S,U	hd0:sectors per track

0x24	S,U	hd1:cylinders - low
0x25	S,U	hd1:cylinders - high
0x26	S,U	hd1:heads
0x27	S,U	hd1:write pre-comp - low
0x28	S,U	hd1:write pre-comp - high
0x29	S,U	hd1:retries/bad_map/heads>8
0x2a	S,U	hd1:landing zone - low
0x2b	S,U	hd1:landing zone - high
0x2c	S,U	hd1:sectors per track

0x2d	S	boot from (bit5: 0:hd, 1:fd)

0x2e	S,U	standard cmos checksum (0x10->0x2d) - high
0x2f	S,U	standard cmos checksum (0x10->0x2d) - low

0x30	S	extended memory in k - low
0x31	S	extended memory in k - high

0x32	S	rtc century

0x34	S	extended memory in 64k - low
0x35	S	extended memory in 64k - high

0x37	S	ps/2 rtc century (copy of 0x32, needed for winxp)

0x38	S	eltorito boot sequence + boot signature check
	bits
	0	floppy boot signature check (1: disabled, 0: enabled)
	7-4	boot drive #3 (0: unused, 1: fd, 2: hd, 3:cd, else: fd)

0x39	S	ata translation policy - ata0 + ata1
	bits
	1-0	ata0-master (0: none, 1: LBA, 2: LARGE, 3: R-ECHS)
	3-2	ata0-slave
	5-4	ata1-master
	7-6	ata1-slave

0x3a	S	ata translation policy - ata2 + ata3 (see above)

0x3b	S	ata biosdetect flags - ata0 + ata1 (unimplemented)
	bits
	1-0	ata0-master (0: auto, 1: cmos, 2: none)
	3-2	ata0-slave
	5-4	ata1-master
	7-6	ata1-slave

0x3c	S	ata biosdetect flags - ata2 + ata3 (unimplemented)

0x3d	S	eltorito boot sequence (see above)
	bits
	3-0	boot drive #1
	7-4	boot drive #2

0x3f	S	BIOS options
	bits
	0	fastboot (skip boot menu delay)
	7-1	reserved

0x5b	S 	extra memory above 4GB
0x5c	S 	extra memory above 4GB
0x5d	S 	extra memory above 4GB
0x5f	Q	number of processors
</screen>
</para>
</section>

<section id="sb16-emulation-basics"> <!-- start of SB16 section-->

<title>Sound Blaster 16 Emulation</title>

<para>
This section is a detailed description for configuring Sound Blaster 16 from
source. If you have a binary and all you want to know is what to put in your
<filename>bochsrc</filename> file, see the <ulink url="../user/bochsrc.html#BOCHSOPT-SB16">sb16</ulink>
bochsrc option in the user guide.
</para>

<para>
The original version of the Sound Blaster 16 (SB16) emulation for Bochs was
written and donated by Josef Drexler. The entire set of his SB16 patches have
been integrated into Bochs, however, so you can find everything you need here.
</para>

<section><title>How well does it work?</title>
<para>
Right now, MPU401 emulation is next to perfect. It supports UART
and SBMIDI mode, because the SB16's MPU401 ports can't do anything else as well.
</para>

<para>
The digital audio basically works, but the emulation is too slow for fluent
output unless the application doesn't do much in the background (or the
foreground, really). The sound tends to looping or crackle on slower
computer, but the emulation appears to be correct. Even a MOD
player works, although only for lower sampling speeds.
</para>
<para>
The OPL3 chip now also produces output. The source code has been ported from
DOSBox and the output data is polled from the mixer thread.
</para>
<para>
Also, the MIDI data running through the MPU401 ports can be written
into a SMF, that is the standard midi file. The wave output
can be written into a VOC file, which has a format defined by
Creative Labs. Output to a WAV file and dual output (device and file
at the same time) is now also supported.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Output to a sound card</title>

<para>
Output to the host sound system is supported on Windows, Linux, FreeBSD, MacOS 9,
MacOSX and platforms supported by SDL.
</para>
<para>
On Linux using OSS, the output goes to any file or device. If you have a
wavetable synthesizer, midi can go to <filename class="devicefile">/dev/midi00</filename>,
otherwise you may need a midi interpreter. For example, the midid program from
the DosEmu project would work. Wave output should go to <filename class="devicefile">/dev/dsp</filename>.
These devices are assumed to be OSS devices, if they're not some of the ioctl's
might fail. If ALSA is present on Linux and the sound driver is set to
<filename>alsa</filename>, Bochs uses it's default PCM output device and MIDI
sequencer.
</para>
<para>
On Windows, midi and wave output go to the midi mapper and the wave mapper,
respectively. The device ID for the midi is now selectable. A future version
might also have selectable wave output devices.
</para>
<para>
See the next section for more information about the sound lowlevel interface.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Configuring Bochs</title>

<para>
You need to <command>configure</command> Bochs using the <option>--enable-sb16</option>
option.
There are a few values in <filename>config.h</filename> that are relevant to the
sound functions. Editing <filename>config.h</filename> after running configure
is usually not necessary, since it detects the available drivers and enables them
for the compilation.
</para>

<para>
BX_USE_SB16_SMF should be 1 unless you intend to have several sound cards
running at the same time.
</para>

<para>
BX_SOUND_LOWLEVEL_NAME is the name of the driver used as the "default" one for
all features. The default value of this setting is the dummy driver with no output.
The configure script usually changes this value. The following are supported at
the moment:
</para>

<programlisting>
    alsa   Output for Linux with ALSA PCM and sequencer interface
    oss    Output for Linux, to /dev/dsp and /dev/midi00
    osx    Output for MacOSX midi and wave device
    sdl    Wave output with SDL/SDL2
    win    Output for Windows midi and wave mappers
    file   Wave and midi output to file
    dummy  Dummy functions, no output
</programlisting>

<para>
Setup the SB16 emulation in your <filename>bochsrc</filename>, according to instructions
in that file (see <ulink url="../user/bochsrc.html#BOCHSOPT-SB16">sb16</ulink> option
in the user guide).
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Runtime configuration</title>

<para>
The source and the DOS executable for the SB16CTRL program that is used to modify
the runtime behaviour of the SB16 emulator is included in
misc/sb16.
</para>

<para>
See the section <ulink url="../user/using-sound.html#SB16CTRL">SB16CTRL</ulink>
in the user documentation for information about the commands of SB16CTRL.
</para>
</section>

</section> <!-- end of SB16 section-->

<section id="sound-lowlovel-basics">
<title>The sound lowlevel interface</title>

<para>
This file is intended for programmers who would like to port the sound
output routines to their platform. It gives a short outline what services
have to be provided.
</para>
<para>
You should also have a look at the exisiting files, <emphasis>SOUNDLOW.CC</emphasis>,
<emphasis>SOUNDMOD.CC</emphasis> and e.g. <emphasis>SOUNDLNX.CC</emphasis> for Linux
or <emphasis>SOUNDWIN.CC</emphasis> for Windows and their respective header files
to get an idea about how these things really work.
</para>

<section><title>Files</title>
<para>
The main include file for a lowlevel sound driver is <emphasis>iodev.h</emphasis>.
It has all definitions for the system-independent functions that a sound driver
uses. The sound driver also needs to include <emphasis>soundlow.h</emphasis> for
the definitions of the base classes <emphasis>bx_sound_lowlevel_c</emphasis>,
<emphasis>bx_soundlow_waveout_c</emphasis>, <emphasis>bx_soundlow_wavein_c</emphasis>
and <emphasis>bx_soundlow_midiout_c</emphasis>.
</para>

<para>
Additionally, every output driver will have an include file, which should be
included on top of <filename>soundmod.cc</filename> to allow the emulator
to use that driver. The code to initialize the object for the selected drivers
can be found in that file, so a soundcard emulation does not need to include
the specific driver headers.
</para>

<para>
To actually make the emulator use any specific driver as the default,
<emphasis>BX_SOUND_LOWLEVEL_NAME</emphasis> has to be set to the name of the
respective driver.
</para>

<para>
Note that if your class contains any system-specific statements,
include-files and so on, you should enclose both the include-file and
the CC-file in an <emphasis>#if defined</emphasis> (OS-define) construct.
Also don't forget to add your file to the list of lowlevel sound object
files (<emphasis>SOUNDLOW_OBJS</emphasis>) in the file <emphasis>configure.in</emphasis>
and to regenerate the configure script,
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Defines and strutures</title>
<para>
<screen>
#define BX_SOUNDLOW_WAVEPACKETSIZE  19200

#define BX_SOUNDLOW_OK   0
#define BX_SOUNDLOW_ERR  1

typedef struct {
  Bit16u samplerate;
  Bit8u  bits;
  Bit8u  channels;
  Bit8u  format;
  Bit16u volume;
} bx_pcm_param_t;

const bx_pcm_param_t default_pcm_param = {44100, 16, 2, 1};
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The maximum size of a wave data packet, the return values of the lowlevel
functions, the structure for the PCM parameters and the default parameter
set are also important for the sound driver development. They can be found
in the main include file <emphasis>soundlow.h</emphasis>.
</para>
<para>
All lowlevel sound methods called from the device code have to return either
<emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_OK</emphasis> if the function was successful, or
<emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_ERR</emphasis> if not. If any of the initialization
functions fail, the device emulation should disable the affected feature.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Classes</title>
<para>
The following classes are involved with the sound lowlevel interface:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bx_soundmod_ctl_c</emphasis> is a pseudo device that is used to
initialize the sound drivers depending on the configuration.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bx_sound_lowlevel_c</emphasis> is the base class of the
lowlevel sound support. It has methods to return pointers to the objects for
the available services <emphasis>waveout</emphasis>, <emphasis>wavein</emphasis>
and <emphasis>midiout</emphasis>. The base class returns NULL for all services.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bx_sound_dummy_c</emphasis> is derived from <emphasis>bx_sound_lowlevel_c</emphasis>.
It returns vaild pointers for all services, but the output classes are only
implemented as stubs and the <emphasis>wavein</emphasis> service returns silence.
This "dummy" driver is used whenever a OS specific driver does not implement
all services.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bx_soundlow_waveout_c</emphasis>, <emphasis>bx_soundlow_wavein_c</emphasis>
and <emphasis>bx_soundlow_midiout_c</emphasis> are the base classes for the
services provided by the Bochs lowlevel sound support. Some methods are stubs
and used by the "dummy" sound driver, others are helper methods and used by
the OS specific implementations derived from these base classes.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bx_sound_OS_c</emphasis> is derived from <emphasis>bx_sound_lowlevel_c</emphasis>.
It returns vaild pointers for all services it implements for the selected
<emphasis>OS</emphasis> (operating system / library) or NULL for services it does
not implement. In the second case the Bochs sound init code falls back to the
"dummy" driver.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>The base class <emphasis>bx_sound_lowlevel_c</emphasis></title>
<para>
<screen>
class bx_sound_lowlevel_c : public logfunctions {
public:
  bx_sound_lowlevel_c();
  virtual ~bx_sound_lowlevel_c();

  virtual bx_soundlow_waveout_c* get_waveout() {return NULL;}
  virtual bx_soundlow_wavein_c* get_wavein() {return NULL;}
  virtual bx_soundlow_midiout_c* get_midiout() {return NULL;}

protected:
  bx_soundlow_waveout_c *waveout;
  bx_soundlow_wavein_c *wavein;
  bx_soundlow_midiout_c *midiout;
};
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The base class for sound lowlevel support is derived from the <emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis>
class to make the Bochs logging capabilities available in the sound driver code.
The constructor of this base class only initializes all pointers to NULL and
the destructor deletes the objects if necessary.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>The <emphasis>waveout</emphasis> base class <emphasis>bx_soundlow_waveout_c</emphasis></title>
<para>
<screen>
class bx_soundlow_waveout_c : public logfunctions {
public:
  bx_soundlow_waveout_c();
  virtual ~bx_soundlow_waveout_c();

  virtual int openwaveoutput(const char *wavedev);
  virtual int set_pcm_params(bx_pcm_param_t *param);
  virtual int sendwavepacket(int length, Bit8u data[], bx_pcm_param_t *src_param);
  virtual int get_packetsize();
  virtual int output(int length, Bit8u data[]);
  virtual int closewaveoutput();

  virtual int register_wave_callback(void *, get_wave_cb_t wd_cb);
  virtual void unregister_wave_callback(int callback_id);

  virtual bx_bool mixer_common(Bit8u *buffer, int len);
protected:
  void convert_pcm_data(Bit8u *src, int srcsize, Bit8u *dst, int dstsize, bx_pcm_param_t *param);
  void start_mixer_thread(void);

  bx_pcm_param_t emu_pcm_param, real_pcm_param;
  int cvt_mult;

  int cb_count;
  struct {
    void *device;
    get_wave_cb_t cb;
  } get_wave[BX_MAX_WAVE_CALLBACKS];
  int pcm_callback_id;
};
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The base class for wave output support is also derived from the
<emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis> class. In addition to wave output methods
used from sound devices, it contains everything required for the mixer thread
feature (register PCM sources, convert data formats, start mixer).
</para>
<para>
The constructor should <emphasis>not</emphasis> allocate the output devices.
This should be done in <emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis>.
</para>
<para>
This table shows the waveout class methods, where are they called from and
if a platform / library specific implementation is required.
<table>
<title>Waveout methods</title>
<tgroup cols="3">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Method</entry>
<entry>Called from</entry>
<entry>Platform code</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row><entry><emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis></entry><entry>Sound init code</entry><entry>Required</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>set_pcm_params()</emphasis></entry><entry><emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> and <emphasis>sendwavepacket()</emphasis></entry><entry>Required</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>sendwavepacket()</emphasis></entry><entry>Sound device emulation</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>get_packetsize()</emphasis></entry><entry>Mixer thread</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>output()</emphasis></entry><entry>Mixer thread</entry><entry>Required</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>closewaveoutput()</emphasis></entry><entry>Sound device emulation</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>register_wave_callback()</emphasis></entry><entry><emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> and sound device emulation</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>unregister_wave_callback()</emphasis></entry><entry>class destructor and sound device emulation</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>mixer_common()</emphasis></entry><entry>Mixer thread</entry><entry>Optional</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>convert_pcm_data()</emphasis></entry><entry>Internal</entry><entry>No</entry></row>
<row><entry><emphasis>start_mixer_thread()</emphasis></entry><entry>Internal</entry><entry>No</entry></row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>

</para>

<section><title>int openwaveoutput(const char *wavedev)</title>

<para>
<emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> is called when the sound output subsystem
initializes. It should do the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Set up the default PCM parameters for output.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
Open the given device, and prepare it for wave output.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
Register the callback function for the PCM buffer queue (<emphasis>sendwavepacket()</emphasis>
adds the output to the queue and the mixer thread gets it from there).
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
Start the mixer thread, unless the sound library has it's own one (e.g. SDL).
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
<emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> will only be called once, whereas
<emphasis>set_pcm_params()</emphasis> is called whenever the PCM samplerate
has been changed.
</para>

<para>The parameters are the following:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>wavedev</emphasis> is the wave output device selected by the user.
It is strictly system-dependent. Some sound libraries currently ignore this
value and use the default one instead. The value is that of the <emphasis>waveout=device</emphasis>
configuration parameter of the <emphasis>sound</emphasis> bochsrc option.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
Note that only one wave output device will be used at any one time.
<emphasis>wavedev</emphasis> may not have the same value throughout one session,
but it will be closed before it is changed.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>int set_pcm_params(bx_pcm_param_t *param)</title>

<para>
This function should called from <emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> to initialize
the output device with the default parameters and from <emphasis>sendwavepacket()</emphasis>
whenever the samplerate has been changed in the emulated sound device.
It should do the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Open the wave output device, unless <emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> did that
already.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Prepare the device for data and set the device parameters to those given
in the function call.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
The parameters are the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>param</emphasis> is a pointer to a structure containing the set of
parameters required to set up a sound device for PCM output.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
The members of the structure <emphasis>bx_pcm_param_t</emphasis> are these:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>samplerate</emphasis> is the desired frequency of the
output. Because of the capabities of the soundcards, it can have any value
between 5000 and 48,000.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>bits</emphasis> is either 8 or 16, denoting the resolution
of one sample.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>channels</emphasis> is the number of channels (2 for stereo output,
or 1 for mono output.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>format</emphasis> is a bit-coded value (see below).
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>volume</emphasis> is the output volume to be used by the mixer code.
The 16 bit value consists of two 8 bit values for each channel.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
<table>
<title>format bits</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Bit number</entry>
<entry>Meaning</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry> 0 (LSB)  </entry><entry><para> 0: unsigned data </para><para>
                                            1: signed data </para></entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 1..6     </entry><entry> Type of codec (see below) </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 7        </entry><entry><para> 0: no reference byte </para><para>
                                             1: with reference byte </para></entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 8..x     </entry><entry> reserved (0) </entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>

<table>
<title>codecs</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Value</entry>
<entry>Meaning</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry> 0 </entry><entry> PCM (raw data) </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 1 </entry><entry> reserved </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 2 </entry><entry> 2-bit ADPCM (Creative Labs format) </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 3 </entry><entry> 2.4-bit (3-bit) ADPCM (Creative Labs format) </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 4 </entry><entry> 4-bit ADPCM (Creative Labs format) </entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
<para>
Other codecs are not supported by the SB hardware. In fact, most applications will
translate their data into raw data, so that in most cases the codec will be zero.
</para>
<para>
The number of bytes per sample can be calculated from this as (bits / 8) * channels.
</para>
</section>


<section>
<title>int sendwavepacket(int length, Bit8u data[], bx_pcm_param_t *src_param)</title>

<para>
This function is called whenever a data packet of at most
<emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_WAVEPACKETSIZE</emphasis> is ready at the soundcard
emulation. It should then do the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Add this wave packet to the waveout buffer chain after converting to 16 bit signed
little endian. If the samplerate has been changed <emphasis>set_pcm_params()</emphasis>
should be called to update the sound hardware settings.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
Parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>length</emphasis> is the number of data bytes in
the data stream. It will never be larger than <emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_WAVEPACKETSIZE</emphasis>.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>data</emphasis> is the array of data bytes.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>src_param</emphasis> is a pointer to a structure containing the PCM parameters
(see above).
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
The order of bytes in the data stream is the same as that in the Wave file format:

<table>
<title>wave output types</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Output type</entry>
<entry>Sequence of data bytes</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry> 8 bit mono </entry><entry> Sample 1; Sample 2; Sample 3; etc. </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 8 bit stereo </entry><entry> Sample 1, Channel 0; Sample 1, Channel 1; Sample 2, Channel 0; Sample 2, Channel 1; etc. </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 16 bit mono </entry><entry> Sample 1, LSB; Sample 1, MSB; Sample 2, LSB; Sample 2, MSB; etc. </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 16 bit stereo </entry><entry> Sample 1, LSB, Channel 0; Sample 1, MSB, Channel 0; Sample 1, LSB, Channel 1; Sample 1, MSB, Channel 1; etc. </entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>

<para>
Typically 8 bit data will be unsigned with values from 0 to 255, and
16 bit data will be signed with values from -32768 to 32767, although the
soundcard emulations are not limited to this.
site.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int get_packetsize()</title>
<para>
This function is called from the mixer thread to retrieve the size of a wave data
packet based on the current samplerate. By default the packet size is big enough
to send output for 0.1 seconds. If the host sound driver / library uses a different
value, this value should be returned with this method.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int output(int length, Bit8u data[])</title>
<para>
This function is called from the mixer thread to send the mixed PCM output to
the host sound hardware.
</para>
<para>
Parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>length</emphasis> is the number of data bytes in
the data stream. It will never be larger than the value returned from <emphasis>get_packetsize</emphasis>.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>data</emphasis> is the array of data bytes.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>int closewaveoutput()</title>
<para>
This function is currently only called from the soundcard emulation if the "file"
driver is used. This makes the runtime change of the output file possible.
By default this method does nothing and the wave output device is closed in the
destructor of the specific class.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int register_wave_callback(void *arg, get_wave_cb_t wd_cb)</title>
<para>
This function is called from <emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis> to register
the function to retrieve data from the PCM output buffer chain. Other sound
emulation devices (e.g. OPL3, PC speaker) can register a function to poll the
data from the device emulation. The return value is the ID of the registered
function and it is usually used to unregister the source.
</para>
<para>
Parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>arg</emphasis> is the pointer to the device emulation object.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>wd_cb</emphasis> is the pointer to a static function that returns
wave data from the device emulation. This function is usually called from the
<emphasis>mixer_common()</emphasis> method.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>void unregister_wave_callback(int callback_id)</title>
<para>
This function is usually called from the destructor of the sound emulation
device to unregister it's registered function to poll PCM data. If the
driver / library doesn't use the default mixer thread, a specific implementation
of this method my be required.
</para>
<para>
Parameter:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>callback_id</emphasis> is the ID of the function to unregister.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>bx_bool mixer_common(Bit8u *buffer, int len)</title>
<para>
This is the main wave output mixing function. It is called from the mixer
thread, it polls the wave data from all registered sources and it mixes the
data using a simple algorithm (addition and clipping). The return value
indicates whether or not wave data is available for output.
</para>
<para>
Parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>buffer</emphasis> is the output buffer for the wave data.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>len</emphasis> is the maximum length of the output buffer.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>void convert_pcm_data(Bit8u *src, int srcsize, Bit8u *dst, int dstsize, bx_pcm_param_t *param)</title>
<para>
This function converts the PCM data sent from the sound device emulation to the
16 bit stereo signed little endian format. It should be called in <emphasis>sendwavepacket()</emphasis>
after allocating the output buffer in the buffer queue. Future versions might
also perform resampling here.
</para>
<para>
Parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>src</emphasis> is the buffer containing data sent from the sound emulation.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>srcsize</emphasis> is the amount of wave data to be converted.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>dst</emphasis> is the buffer for the converted wave data.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>dstsize</emphasis> is the size of the destination buffer.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>param</emphasis> is a pointer to the struture containing the format
parameters of the source data.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>void start_mixer_thread()</title>
<para>
This function starts the mixer thread and it should be called in <emphasis>openwaveoutput()</emphasis>
unless the sound driver / library has it's own way to do this (e.g. SDL). This
function also initializes the mutex required for locking the mixer thread when
adding data to the buffer chain or unregistering a source.
</para>
</section>
</section>

<section><title>The <emphasis>wavein</emphasis> base class <emphasis>bx_soundlow_wavein_c</emphasis></title>
<para>
<screen>
class bx_soundlow_wavein_c : public logfunctions {
public:
  bx_soundlow_wavein_c();
  virtual ~bx_soundlow_wavein_c();

  virtual int openwaveinput(const char *wavedev, sound_record_handler_t rh);
  virtual int startwaverecord(bx_pcm_param_t *param);
  virtual int getwavepacket(int length, Bit8u data[]);
  virtual int stopwaverecord();

  static void record_timer_handler(void *);
  void record_timer(void);
protected:
  int record_timer_index;
  int record_packet_size;
  sound_record_handler_t record_handler;
};
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The base class for wave input support is also derived from the
<emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis> class. It contains the framework for wave
input (recording) support. The base class is used by the "dummy" sound driver
and returns silence to let the input mechanism of the soundcard emulation work.
The soundcard emulator object needs to implement a callback function to notifies
the emulation about available data. This function usually calls the driver method
to get the wave data packet. The driver objects has a periodic timer with an
interval of 0.1 emulated seconds that is active during recording. The timer
handler processes the wave data recorded with platform or library specific
function and finally notifies the emulator.
</para>
<para>
The constructor of the base class only initializes the timer ID. OS specific
implementations should initialize other required members here.
</para>
<para>
The destructor of the base class only calls <emphasis>stopwaverecord()</emphasis>.
OS specific implementations should close the input device here if necessary.
</para>

<section><title>int openwaveinput(char *device, sound_record_handler_t rh)</title>
<para>
<emphasis>openwaveinput()</emphasis> is called when the sound emulation first
receives a sound recording command. It should do the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Open the given device, and prepare it for wave input
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
<emphasis>or</emphasis>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Store the device name so that the device can be opened in <emphasis>startwaverecord()</emphasis>.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
In addition to this the record handler value should be stored and the record timer
should be registered. This is the definition of record handler callback function:
<screen>
typedef Bit32u (*sound_record_handler_t)(void *arg, Bit32u len);
</screen>
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>openwaveinput()</emphasis> will only be called once, whereas
<emphasis>startwaverecord()</emphasis> is called for every new wave input
command to the soundcard emulation. If feasible, it could be useful to open
and/or lock  the input device in <emphasis>startwaverecord()</emphasis> as
opposed to <emphasis>openwaveinput()</emphasis> to ensure that it can be used
by other applications while Bochs doesn't need it.
</para>

<para>The parameters are the following: </para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>device</emphasis> is the wave device selected by the user. It is
strictly system-dependent. The value is that of the <emphasis>wavein=device</emphasis>
configuration parameter of the <emphasis>sound</emphasis> bochsrc option.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>rh</emphasis> is a pointer to the record handler method of the sound
emulation. When sound recording is active, this handler is called periodicly to
notify the sound emulation about newly available data.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
Note that only one wave input device will be used at any one time.
<emphasis>device</emphasis> may not have the same value throughout one session,
but it will be closed before it is changed.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>int startwaverecord(bx_pcm_param_t *param)</title>
<para>
This method receives a pointer to the required PCM parameters (samplerate,
data format) as the argument and it should set up the input device for recording,
calculate the size of the recording packet for 0.1 second and start the record
timer.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>int getwavepacket(int length, Bit8u data[])</title>
<para>
This method is called from the record handler method of the sound emulation device
to retrieve the recorded wave data packet.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int stopwaverecord()</title>
<para>
This method is called to stop the wave recording. It deactivates the timer that
calls the method to perform the recording.
</para>
</section>

</section>

<section><title>The <emphasis>midiout</emphasis> base class <emphasis>bx_soundlow_midiout_c</emphasis></title>
<para>
<screen>
class bx_soundlow_midiout_c : public logfunctions {
public:
  bx_soundlow_midiout_c();
  virtual ~bx_soundlow_midiout_c();

  virtual int openmidioutput(const char *mididev);
  virtual int midiready();
  virtual int sendmidicommand(int delta, int command, int length, Bit8u data[]);
  virtual int closemidioutput();
};
</screen>
</para>
<para>
The base class for MIDI output support is also derived from the
<emphasis>logfunctions</emphasis> class.
</para>
<para>
OS specific implementations should initialize required members in the constructor.
</para>
<para>
The destructor of the base class only calls <emphasis>closemidioutput()</emphasis>.
OS specific implementations should close the input device here if necessary.
</para>

<section><title>int openmidioutput(char *device)</title>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>openmidioutput()</emphasis> is called when the first midi output starts.
It is only called if the midi output to the driver is active (midimode 1). It should
prepare the given MIDI hardware for receiving midi commands.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
Description of the parameters:
</para>

<para>
<itemizedlist>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>mididev</emphasis> is a system-dependent variable.
The value is that of the <emphasis>midiout=device</emphasis>
configuration parameter of the <emphasis>sound</emphasis> bochsrc option.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Note that only one midi output device will be used at any one time.
<emphasis>device</emphasis>
may not have the same value throughout one session, but it will be closed
before it is changed.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int midiready()</title>

<para>
<emphasis>midiready()</emphasis> is called whenever the applications asks if the
midi queue can accept more data.
</para>

<para>
Return values:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_OK</emphasis> if the midi output device is ready.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>BX_SOUNDLOW_ERR</emphasis> if it isn't ready.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
<emphasis>Note: </emphasis><emphasis>midiready()</emphasis> will be called a few times
<emphasis>before</emphasis> the device is opened. If this is the case, it should
always report that it is ready, otherwise the application (not Bochs)
will hang.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>int sendmidicommand(int delta, int command, int length, Bit8u data[])</title>

<para>
<emphasis>sendmidicommand()</emphasis>is called whenever a complete midi command has
been written to the emulator. It should then send the given midi command to the midi hardware.
It will only be called after the midi output has been opened. Note that
if at all possible it should not wait for the completion of the command
and instead indicate that the device is not ready during the execution
of the command. This is to avoid delays in the program while it is
generating midi output.
</para>

<para>
Description of the parameters:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
<emphasis>delta</emphasis> is the number of delta ticks that
have passed since the last command has been issued. It is always zero for
the first command. There are 24 delta ticks per quarter, and 120 quarters
per minute, thus 48 delta ticks per second.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>command</emphasis> is the midi command byte (sometimes
called status byte), in the usual range of 0x80..0xff. For more information
please see the midi standard specification.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>length</emphasis> is the number of data bytes that
are contained in the data structure. This does <emphasis>not</emphasis> include the status
byte which is not replicated in the data array. It can only be greater
than 3 for SysEx messages (commands <emphasis>0xF0</emphasis> and <emphasis>0xF7</emphasis>)
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
<emphasis>data[]</emphasis> is the array of these data bytes,
in the order they have in the standard MIDI specification.
Note, it might be <emphasis>NULL</emphasis> if length==0.
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section><title>int closemidioutput()</title>

<para>
<emphasis>closemidioutput()</emphasis> is called before shutting down Bochs or
when the
emulator gets the <emphasis>stop_output</emphasis> command through the emulator port.
After this, no more output will be necessary until <emphasis>openmidioutput()</emphasis>
is called again, but <emphasis>midiready()</emphasis> might still be called. It should
do the following:
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
Wait for all remaining messages to be completed
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
Reset and close the midi output device
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

</section>

</section>

<section id="harddisk-redologs"><title>Harddisk Images based on redologs</title>
<para>
This section describes how the three new disk images "undoable", "growing", and "volatile" are
implemented in Bochs 2.1. It also applies to the write support the "vvfat" disk
image mode in Bochs 2.4.6.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
undoable -> base r/o file, plus growing, commitable, rollbackable redolog file
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
growing  -> growing files, all previously unwritten sectors go to the end of file
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
volatile -> base r/o file, plus hidden growing redolog
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
vvfat -> virtual VFAT disk created from directory, plus hidden growing redolog
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
</para>

<section>
<title>
        Description
</title>
<para>
The idea behind volatile and undoable disk images is to have a read-only base
file, associated with one redolog file. In case of vvfat, a directory is
associated with the redolog file.
</para>
<para>
Reading a sector is done from the redolog file if it contains
the sector, or from the base file / vvfat directory otherwise.
</para>
<para>
Sectors written go to the redolog,
so base image files are opened in read only mode in this configuration.
</para>
<para>
The redolog is designed in a way so it starts as a small file
and grows with every new sectors written to it. Previously written
sectors are done in place. Redolog files can not shrink.
</para>
<para>
The redolog is a growing file that can be created on the fly.
</para>
<para>
Now, it turns out that if you only use a redolog without any
base image file, you get a "growing" disk image.
</para>
<para>
So "undoable", "volatile", "growing" and "vvfat" harddisk images classes
are implemented on top of a redolog class.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        How redologs works ?
</title>

<para>
At the start of a redolog file, there is a header, so Bochs can check whether
a file is consistent.
This header is also checked when the automatic type and size detection is
selected.
</para>
<para>
The generic part of the header contains values like type of image, and
spec version number.
</para>
<para>
The header also has a specific part.
For redologs, the number
of entries of the catalog, the extent, bitmap and disk size are stored.
</para>

<para>
In a redolog, the disk image is divided in a number of equal size "extents".
Each extent is a collection of successive 512-bytes sectors of the disk image,
preceeded by a n*512bytes bitmap.
</para>

<para>
the n*512bytes bitmap defines the presence (data has been written to it)
of a specific sector in the extent, one bit for each sector.
Therefore with a 512bytes bitmap, each extent can hold up to 4k blocks
</para>

<para>
Typically the catalog can have 256k entries.
With a 256k entries catalog and 512bytes bitmaps, the redolog can hold up to 512GiB
</para>

<note>
<para>
All data is stored on images as little-endian values
</para>
</note>
<section>
<title>
        Header
</title>
<para>
At the start of a redolog file, there is a header. This header is designed
to be reusable by other disk image types.
</para>
<para>
The header length is 512 bytes. It contains :
<table>
<title>Generic header description</title>
<tgroup cols="5">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Start position in bytes</entry>
<entry>Length in bytes</entry>
<entry>Data type</entry>
<entry>Description</entry>
<entry>Possible values</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry> 0 </entry> <entry> 32 </entry> <entry> string </entry> <entry> magical value </entry> <entry> Bochs Virtual HD Image </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 32 </entry> <entry> 16 </entry> <entry> string </entry> <entry> type of file </entry> <entry> Redolog </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 48 </entry> <entry> 16 </entry> <entry> string </entry> <entry> subtype of file </entry> <entry> Undoable, Volatile, Growing </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 64 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> version of used specification </entry> <entry> 0x00010000, 0x00020000 </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 68 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> header size </entry> <entry> 512 </entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
<para>
The current version of the header is 0x00020000 (2.0) - see below for details.
<table>
<title>Redolog specific header description</title>
<tgroup cols="4">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Start position in bytes</entry>
<entry>Length in bytes</entry>
<entry>Data type</entry>
<entry>Description</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry> 72 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> number of entries in the catalog </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 76 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> bitmap size in bytes </entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 80 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> extent size in bytes</entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 84 </entry> <entry> 4 </entry> <entry> Bit32u </entry> <entry> timestamp in FAT format ("undoable" mode only - otherwise reserved)</entry> </row>
<row> <entry> 88 </entry> <entry> 8 </entry> <entry> Bit64u </entry> <entry> disk size in bytes </entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
<para>
The reserved field between "extent" and "disk" has been added in redolog version
2.0 to fix an alignment bug on some platforms. It is now used for consistency
check of the "undoable" mode. When creating the redolog file, the timestamp of
the read-only file is stored there (in FAT format). After that, the "undoable"
mode init code compares the timestamp of the r/o file with the one stored in
the redolog.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        Catalog
</title>
<para>
Immediately following the header, there is a catalog containing
the position number (in extents) where each extent is located in the file.
</para>
<para>
Each position is a Bit32u entity.
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        Bitmap
</title>
<para>
Each extent starts with a bitmap block of n*512 bytes size. Each byte of the
bitmap stores the write status of 8 coresponding disk sectors in the extent
(1 = data written).
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        Extent
</title>
<para>
This is a collection of successive 512-bytes sectors of the disk image.
The bitmap preceeding this data block contains the write status of each sector.
</para>
</section>
</section>

<section>
<title>Parameters
</title>
<para>
The following tables shows what parameters are used when creating redologs or creating "growing" images :
<table>
<title>
        How number of entries in the catalog and number of blocks by extents are computed
</title>
<tgroup cols="5">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Catalog entries</entry> <entry>Catalog size(KiB)</entry> <entry>Bitmap size (B)</entry> <entry>Extent size (KiB)</entry> <entry>Disk Max Size</entry>
</row>
</thead>

<tbody>
<row>
<entry>512</entry> <entry>2</entry> <entry>1</entry> <entry>4</entry> <entry>2MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>512</entry> <entry>2</entry> <entry>2</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>4MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>1k</entry> <entry>4</entry> <entry>2</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>8MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>1k</entry> <entry>4</entry> <entry>4</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>16MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>2k</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>4</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>32MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>2k</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>64MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>4k</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>8</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>128MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>4k</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>256MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>8k</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>16</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>512MiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>8k</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>1GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>16k</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>32</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>2GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>16k</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>4GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>32k</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>64</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>8GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>32k</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>16GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>64k</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>128</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>32GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>64k</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>64GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>128k</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>256</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>128GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>128k</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>256GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>256k</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>512</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>512GiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>256k</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>1TiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>512k</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>1024</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>2TiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>512k</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>8192</entry> <entry>4TiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>1024k</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>2048</entry> <entry>8192</entry> <entry>8TiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>1024k</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>16384</entry> <entry>16TiB</entry>
</row>
<row>
<entry>2048k</entry> <entry>8192</entry> <entry>4096</entry> <entry>16384</entry> <entry>32TiB</entry>
</row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>

</section>

<section>
<title>
        Redolog class description
</title>
<para>
The class <emphasis>redolog_t();</emphasis> implements the necessary
methods to create, open, close, read and write data to a redolog.
It also contains methods for the subtype and consistency check and
for the save/restore support. Managment of header catalog and sector
bitmaps is done internally by the class.
</para>
<section>
<title>
        Constants
</title>
<para>
<screen>
#define STANDARD_HEADER_MAGIC     "Bochs Virtual HD Image"
#define STANDARD_HEADER_VERSION   (0x00020000)
#define STANDARD_HEADER_SIZE      (512)
</screen>
These constants are used in the generic part of the header.
</para>

<para>
<screen>
#define REDOLOG_TYPE "Redolog"
#define REDOLOG_SUBTYPE_UNDOABLE "Undoable"
#define REDOLOG_SUBTYPE_VOLATILE "Volatile"
#define REDOLOG_SUBTYPE_GROWING  "Growing"
</screen>
These constants are used in the specific part of the header.
</para>

<para>
<screen>
#define REDOLOG_PAGE_NOT_ALLOCATED (0xffffffff)
</screen>
This constant is used in the catalog for an unwritten extent.
</para>

</section> <!-- Constants -->

<section> <title>Methods</title>
<para>
<emphasis>redolog_t();</emphasis> instanciates a new redolog.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>int make_header(const char* type, Bit64u size);</emphasis> creates a header
structure in memory, and sets its <emphasis>type</emphasis> and parameters based on the
disk image <emphasis>size</emphasis>. Returns 0.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>int create(const char* filename, const char* type, Bit64u size);</emphasis>
creates a new empty redolog file, with header and catalog, named <emphasis>filename</emphasis>
of type <emphasis>type</emphasis> for a <emphasis>size</emphasis> bytes image.
Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>int create(int filedes, const char* type, Bit64u size);</emphasis>
creates a new empty redolog file, with header and catalog, in a previously
opened file described by <emphasis>filedes</emphasis>, of type <emphasis>type</emphasis>
for a <emphasis>size</emphasis> bytes image.
Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>int open(const char* filename, const char* type, Bit64u size);</emphasis>
opens a redolog file named <emphasis>filename</emphasis>, and checks
for consistency of header values against a <emphasis>type</emphasis> and
<emphasis>size</emphasis>.
Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>int open(const char* filename, const char* type, Bit64u size, int flags);</emphasis>
opens a redolog file with <emphasis>flags</emphasis> applied. This allows to
open a redolog in read-only mode. All other parameters and the return value are
similar to the default <emphasis>open()</emphasis> method above.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>void close();</emphasis>
closes a redolog file.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>off_t lseek(off_t offset, int whence);</emphasis>
seeks at logical data offset <emphasis>offset</emphasis> in a redolog.
<emphasis>offset</emphasis> must be a multiple of 512.
Only SEEK_SET and SEEK_CUR are supported for <emphasis>whence</emphasis>.
Returns -1 if a problem occurred, or the current logical offset in
the redolog.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>ssize_t read(void* buf, size_t count);</emphasis>
reads <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data of the redolog, from current logical offset,
and copies it into <emphasis>buf</emphasis>.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes read, that can be 0 if the data
has not previously be written to the redolog.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>ssize_t write(const void* buf, size_t count);</emphasis>
writes <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data from <emphasis>buf</emphasis>
to the redolog, at current logical offset.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes written.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>Bit64u get_size();</emphasis>
returns the size stored in the "disk" field in the header. This is used for size
autodetection feature ("growing" mode) and the consistency check ("undoable"
mode).
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>Bit32u get_timestamp();</emphasis>
returns the value of the "timestamp" field in the header (only used by the
"undoable" mode).
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>bx_bool set_timestamp(Bit32u timestamp);</emphasis>
writes the <emphasis>timestamp</emphasis> to the header. This is done
by the "undoable" mode init code if <emphasis>get_timestamp()</emphasis> returns
0 or the redolog is newly created.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>static int check_format(int fd, const char *subtype);</emphasis>
checks the format of the file with descriptor <emphasis>fd</emphasis>. Returns
<emphasis>HDIMAGE_FORMAT_OK</emphasis> if the <emphasis>subtype</emphasis>
matches the requested one. This is used for for the image mode autodetection
feature.
</para>
<para>
<emphasis>bx_bool save_state(const char *backup_fname);</emphasis>
copies the redolog file to a new file <emphasis>backup_fname</emphasis>. This is
used by the hdimage save/restore feature.
</para>
</section>

</section> <!-- Redolog class description -->

<section>
<title>
        Disk image classes description
</title>
<para>
"volatile" and "undoable" disk images are easily implemented
by instanciating a <emphasis>device_image_t</emphasis> object (base image)
and a <emphasis>redolog_t</emphasis> object (redolog).
</para>
<para>
"growing" disk images only instanciates a <emphasis>redolog_t</emphasis> object.
</para>
<para>
Class names are <emphasis>undoable_image_t</emphasis>, <emphasis>volatile_image_t</emphasis>
and <emphasis>growing_image_t</emphasis>.
</para>
<para>
When using these disk images, the underlying data structure and layout
is completely hidden to the caller. Then, all offset and size values are
"logical" values, as if the disk was a flat file.
</para>
<section>
<title>
        Constants
</title>
<para>
<screen>
#define UNDOABLE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION ".redolog"
#define UNDOABLE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION_LENGTH (strlen(UNDOABLE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION))
#define VOLATILE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION ".XXXXXX"
#define VOLATILE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION_LENGTH (strlen(VOLATILE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION))
</screen>
These constants are used when building redolog file names
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        undoable_image_t methods
</title>
<para>
<emphasis>
undoable_image_t(Bit64u size, const char* redolog_name);
</emphasis>
instanciates a new <emphasis>undoable_image_t</emphasis>
object. This disk image logical length is <emphasis>size</emphasis> bytes and
the redolog filename is <emphasis>redolog_name</emphasis>.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
int open(const char* pathname);
</emphasis>
opens the disk image <emphasis>pathname</emphasis> in read-only mode,
as an undoable disk image. The image mode of this base image is auto-detected.
All supported disk image modes can be used here. The associated
redolog will be named <emphasis>pathname</emphasis> with a
<emphasis>UNDOABLE_REDOLOG_EXTENSION</emphasis> suffix, unless set in the
constructor. Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void close();
</emphasis>
closes the base image and its redolog.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
off_t lseek(off_t offset, int whence);
</emphasis>
seeks at logical data position <emphasis>offset</emphasis> in
the undoable disk image.
Only SEEK_SET and SEEK_CUR are supported for <emphasis>whence</emphasis>.
Returns -1 if a problem occurred, or the current logical
offset in the undoable disk image.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t read(void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
reads <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data
from the undoable disk image, from current logical offset,
and copies it into <emphasis>buf</emphasis>.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes read.
Data will be read from the redolog if it has
been previously written or from the base image
otherwise.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t write(const void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
writes <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data from <emphasis>buf</emphasis>
to the undoable disk image, at current logical offset.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes written.
Data will always be written to the redolog.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
bx_bool save_state(const char *backup_fname);
</emphasis>
calls the related redolog_t method to save the image state.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void restore_state(const char *backup_fname);
called by the hdimage restore code. Copies the backup file to the original
location and overwrites the existing redolog file.
</emphasis>
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        volatile_image_t methods
</title>
<para>
<emphasis>
volatile_image_t(Bit64u size, const char* redolog_name);
</emphasis>
instanciates a new <emphasis>volatile_image_t</emphasis>
object. This disk image logical length is <emphasis>size</emphasis> bytes and
the redolog filename is <emphasis>redolog_name</emphasis> plus a
random suffix.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
int open(const char* pathname);
</emphasis>
opens the disk image <emphasis>pathname</emphasis> in read-only mode,
as a volatile disk image. The image mode is auto-detected. The associated
redolog will be named <emphasis>pathname</emphasis> with a random suffix,
unless set in the constructor. Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void close();
</emphasis>
closes the base image and its redolog.
The redolog is deleted/lost after close is called.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
off_t lseek(off_t offset, int whence);
</emphasis>
seeks at logical data position <emphasis>offset</emphasis> in
the volatile disk image.
Only SEEK_SET and SEEK_CUR are supported for <emphasis>whence</emphasis>.
Returns -1 if a problem occurred, or the current logical offset in
the volatile disk image.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t read(void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
reads <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data
from the volatile disk image, from current logical offset,
and copies it into <emphasis>buf</emphasis>.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes read.
Data will be read from the redolog if it has
been previously written or from the base image
otherwise.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t write(const void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
writes <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data from <emphasis>buf</emphasis>
to the volatile disk image, at current logical offset.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes written.
Data will always be written to the redolog.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
bx_bool save_state(const char *backup_fname);
</emphasis>
calls the related redolog_t method to save the image state.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void restore_state(const char *backup_fname);
called by the hdimage restore code. Copies the backup file to the original
location and overwrites the existing redolog file.
</emphasis>
</para>
</section>

<section>
<title>
        growing_image_t methods
</title>
<para>
<emphasis>
growing_image_t(Bit64u size);
</emphasis>
instanciates a new <emphasis>growing_image_t</emphasis>
object. This disk image logical length is <emphasis>size</emphasis> bytes.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
int open(const char* pathname);
</emphasis>
opens the growing disk image <emphasis>pathname</emphasis>,
Returns 0 for OK or -1 if a problem occurred.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void close();
</emphasis>
closes the growing disk image.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
off_t lseek(off_t offset, int whence);
</emphasis>
seeks at logical data position <emphasis>offset</emphasis> in
the growable disk image.
Only SEEK_SET and SEEK_CUR are supported for <emphasis>whence</emphasis>.
Returns -1 if a problem occurred, or the current logical offset in
the grwoing image.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t read(void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
reads <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data
from the growing disk image, from current logical offset,
and copies it into <emphasis>buf</emphasis>.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes read.
The buffer will be filled with null bytes if data
has not been previously written to the growing image.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
ssize_t write(const void* buf, size_t count);
</emphasis>
writes <emphasis>count</emphasis> bytes of data from <emphasis>buf</emphasis>
to the growing disk image, at current logical offset.
<emphasis>count</emphasis> must be 512.
Returns the number of bytes written.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
static int check_format(int fd, Bit64u imgsize);
</emphasis>
checks the format of the file with descriptor <emphasis>fd</emphasis>. Returns
<emphasis>HDIMAGE_FORMAT_OK</emphasis> if the file format matches the "growing"
one. This is used for the image mode autodetection feature.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
bx_bool save_state(const char *backup_fname);
</emphasis>
calls the related redolog_t method to save the image state.
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>
void restore_state(const char *backup_fname);
called by the hdimage restore code. Copies the backup file to the original
location and overwrites the existing redolog file.
</emphasis>
</para>
</section>

</section>

</section>

<section id="add-keymapping"><title>How to add keymapping in a GUI client</title>
<para>
Christophe Bothamy, wrote the keymapping code for Bochs, provided these
instructions to help developers to add keymapping to a GUI.
</para>

<screen>
Bochs creates a bx_keymap_c object named bx_keymap.
This object allows you to :
  - load the configuration specified keymap file
  - get the translated BX_KEY_* from your GUI key

You have to provide a translation function from string to your Bit32u key
constant. Casting will be necessary if your key constants are not Bit32u typed.
The function must be "static Bit32u (*)(const char *)" typed, and must return
BX_KEYMAP_UNKNOWN if it can not translate the parameter string.

What you have to do is :
  - call once "void loadKeymap(Bit32u (*)(const char*))",
    providing your translation function, to load the keymap
  - call "Bit32u getBXKey(Bit32u)" that returns the BX_KEY_*
    constant, for each key you want to map.

The file gui/x.cc implements this architecture, so you can refer to it
as an example.
</screen>

</section>
<section id="bochsbios"><title>The Bochs BIOS</title>
<section id="biossums"><title>The biossums utility</title>
<section><title>Intention</title>
<para>
Writing a BIOS for a pc-compatible includes the task of embedding various
checksums. At least there is the overall bios checksum stored in the very
last byte of the program. Depending on the number and types of services the
bios provides there are others, e.g.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>
a checksum for the PCI BIOS extensions
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
a checksum for the PCI interrupt routing table
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>
a checksum for the plug and play BIOS extensions
</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
All these checksums have one common point: using the usual assembler directives
they are hard (if not impossible) to compute at compile time. You can either
compute them by hand --- a tedious, error-prone task, where in addition you
often have to make unreliable assumptions about the memory layout of the
entire BIOS. Or you patch them directly into your compiled BIOS image. Apart
from computing the checksums this is what <command>biossums</command> does for you.
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Checksums</title>
<para>
With the exception of the overall BIOS checksum, in a modern PC BIOS checksums
are not used to ensure data integrity. Instead they are used in conjunction
with certain signatures to securely identify the entry points or the addresses
of important data of some BIOS extensions. Because these services are often
invoked from x86 protected mode the original method via interrupts is not
applicable. Scanning (even only parts) of the BIOS for (short) signatures and
solely relying on this is insecure though, cause the found signature might not
refer to the sought service but rather be some obscure machine code resembling
the signature by accident.
</para>
<para>
Since signatures are usually part of a larger header or table the above
mentioned problem is being circumvented by checksumming over this header and
comparing the result to a checksum stored next to the signature. In practice the
checksum is often part of the header, chosen in a way that the contents of the
header add up to zero.
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Usage</title>
<para>
<command>biossums</command> is very simple and straightforward. The only (and mandatory)
argument is the file name of the BIOS image. The file is being read, patched and written.
So if you want to keep your original file for reference, use <command>biossums</command>
on a copy of your BIOS image.
</para>
<para>
For now, <command>biossums</command> can only rely on signatures to find the locations
of the accompanying checksums. Therefore <command>biossums</command> refuses to set any
checksums if it finds more than one signature of the same type.
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Example output</title>
<para>
Running upon the current BIOS-bochs-legacy <command>biossums</command> displays:
<screen>
PCI-Bios header at: 0x9610
Current checksum:     0x17
Calculated checksum:  0x17  


$PIR header at:     0x99C0
Current checksum:     0x37
Calculated checksum:  0x37


$PnP header at:     0x9C80
Current checksum:     0xD1
Calculated checksum:  0x0F  Setting checksum.


Bios checksum at:   0xFFFF
Current checksum:     0x00
Calculated checksum:  0x28  Setting checksum.
</screen>
</para>
<para>
If we patch in a second "_32_" signature at offset 0x9F00 and reset the $PIR
checksum to 0x00 we get:
</para>
<para>
<screen>
PCI-Bios header at: 0x9610
Current checksum:     0x17
Calculated checksum:  0x17  

PCI-Bios header at: 0x9F00
Current checksum:     0x00
Calculated checksum:  0x00  Multiple PCI headers! No checksum set.


$PIR header at:     0x99C0
Current checksum:     0x00
Calculated checksum:  0x37  Setting checksum.


$PnP header at:     0x9C80
Current checksum:     0x0F
Calculated checksum:  0x0F


Bios checksum at:   0xFFFF
Current checksum:     0x28
Calculated checksum:  0x05  Setting checksum.
</screen>
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Possible enhancements</title>
<para>
Although <command>biossums</command> takes care of all checksums being used by
the BIOS of the Bochs project (as of version 2.02) there are more to cover, e.g.
the checksums for "Plug and Play" BIOS extension.
</para>
<para>
In addition it was planned to provide further information to <command>biossums</command>
via map-/symbol-files to verify the locations of checksums apart from scanning for
signatures. For now this seems not to be necessary; in practice no double
signatures have been observed yet.
</para>
</section>
</section>
</section>

</chapter>

<chapter id="debugger-advanced"><title>Advanced debugger usage</title>
<section id="iodebug"><title>I/O Interface to Bochs Debugger</title>
<para>
This device was added by Dave Poirier (eks@void-core.2y.net).
</para>
<para>
Compiling Bochs with iodebug support
<screen>
./configure --enable-iodebug
make
</screen>
Other optional fields may be added to the ./configure line, see Bochs
documentation for all the information. To enable the iodebug plugin at runtime,
it must be loaded with the 'plugin_ctrl' bochsrc option.
</para>

<para>
<screen>
Using the I/O Interface to the debugger

port range:  0x8A00 - 0x8A01

Port 0x8A00 servers as command register. You can use it to enable the i/o interface,
change which data register is active, etc.

Port 0x8A01 is used as data register for the memory monitoring.
</screen>
</para>
<section><title>Commands supported by port 0x8A00</title>
<para>
<screen>

0x8A00

 Used to enable the device. Any I/O to the debug module before this command is sent
 is sent will simply be ignored.


0x8A01

 Selects register 0: Memory monitoring range start address (inclusive)


0x8A02

 Selects register 1: Memory monitoring range end address (exclusive)


0x8A80

 Enable address range memory monitoring as indicated by register 0 and 1 and
 clears both registers


0x8AE0 - Return to Debugger Prompt

 If the debugger is enabled (via --enable-debugger), sending 0x8AE0 to port 0x8A00
 after the device has been enabled will return the Bochs to the debugger prompt.
 Basically the same as doing CTRL+C.


0x8AE2 - Instruction Trace Disable

 If the debugger is enabled (via --enable-debugger), sending 0x8AE2 to port 0x8A00
 after the device has been enabled will disable instruction tracing


0x8AE3 - Instruction Trace Enable

 If the debugger is enabled (via --enable-debugger), sending 0x8AE3 to port 0x8A00
 after the device has been enabled will enable instruction tracing


0x8AE4 - Register Trace Disable

 If the debugger is enabled (via --enable-debugger), sending 0x8AE4 to port 0x8A00
 after the device has been enabled will disable register tracing.


0x8AE5 - Register Trace Enable

 If the debugger is enabled (via --enable-debugger), sending 0x8AE5 to port 0x8A00
 after the device has been enabled will enable register tracing. This currently
 output the value of all the registers for each instruction traced.
 Note: instruction tracing must be enabled to view the register tracing


0x8AFF

 Disable the I/O interface to the debugger and the memory monitoring functions.
</screen>
<note><para>all accesses must be done using word</para></note>
<note><para>reading this register will return 0x8A00 if currently activated, otherwise 0</para></note>
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Access to port 0x8A01 (write-only)</title>
<para>
All accesses to this port must be done using words. Writing to this port will shift
to the left by 16 the current value of the register and add the provided value to it.
<screen>
Sample:

reg0 = 0x01234567

out port: 0x8A01 data: 0xABCD

reg0 = 0x4567ABCD
</screen>
</para>
</section>
<section><title>Sample</title>
<para>
Enable memory monitoring on first page of text screen (0xb8000-0xb8fa0):
add in bochrc file: <command>optromimage1: file=&quot;asmio.rom&quot;, address=0xd0000</command>
<screen>
/*
 *      Make asmio ROM file:
 *      gcc -c asmio.S
 *      objcopy -O binary asmio.o asmio.rom
 */
        .text
        .global start
        .code16

/* ROM Header */
        .byte 0x55
        .byte 0xAA
        .byte 1                 /* 512 bytes long */

start:
/* Monitor memory access on first page of text screen */
        mov     $0x8A00,%dx     /* Enable iodebug (0x8A00->0x8A00) */
        mov     %dx,%ax
        out     %ax,%dx
        mov     $0x8A01,%ax     /* Select register 0 start addr (0x8A01->0x8A00) */
        out     %ax,%dx
        mov     $0x8A01,%dx     /* Write start addr 0xB8000 (high word first) */
        mov     $0xB,%ax
        out     %ax,%dx
        mov     $0x8000,%ax     /* Write start addr (low word) */
        out     %ax,%dx

        mov     $0x8A02,%ax     /* Select register 1 end addr (0x8A02->0x8A00) */
        mov     $0x8A00,%dx
        out     %ax,%dx
        mov     $0x8A01,%dx     /* Write end addr 0xB8FA0 (high word first) */
        mov     $0xB,%ax
        out     %ax,%dx
        mov     $0x8FA0,%ax     /* Write end addr (low word) */
        out     %ax,%dx

        mov     $0x8A00,%dx     /* Enable addr range memory monitoring (0x8A80->0x8A00) */
        mov     $0x8A80,%ax
        out     %ax,%dx

        mov     $0x8A00,%dx     /* Return to Bochs Debugger Prompt (0x8AE0->0x8A00) */
        mov     $0x8AE0,%ax
        out     %ax,%dx
        lret

        .byte 0x6b              /* Checksum (code dependent!, update it as needed) */
        .align 512              /* NOP follow */
</screen>
</para>
</section>
</section>
<section id="instrumentation"><title>The instrumentation feature</title>
<para>
&FIXME; Not written yet.
</para>
</section>
<section id="debugger-internals"><title>Bochs debugger internals</title>
<para>
&FIXME; Not written yet (take stuff from bxdebugger.html).
</para>
</section>
</chapter>

<chapter id="coding"><title>Coding</title>
<section><title>Coding guidelines</title>
<para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><command>Don't make use of any external C++ classes.</command></para>
<para>They are not offered on all platforms and this would make Bochs non-portable.
There is use of such classes in the optional debugger. I plan on removing this use.
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><command>Don't use fancy C++ features.</command></para>
<para>Bochs is incredibly performance sensitive, and will be increasingly so as
more speed enhancements are added. There's a time and place for most everything
and this is not it. Some advanced features create overhead in the generated code
that you don't see. They also convolute the code, and sometimes occlude that is
really going on.
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Don't use templates</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Don't use virtual functions if not strictly required</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Don't use C++ exceptions</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><command>Use soft tabs.</command></para>
<para>At least when you submit code, convert all hard tabs to spaces.
There is no uniform way to handle tabs properly.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><command>Please do compile with all warnings turned on.</command></para>
<para>It's really difficult to spot interesting warnings when a compile is littered
with non-interesting ones.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para><command>Don't use signed ints where unsigned will do.</command></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><command>Make sure that contributed code / patches are LGPL compatible.</command></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</section>
<section id="svn-release"><title>Building a Bochs release</title>
<section><title>Preparing source files and SVN</title>
<para>
Update version number and strings in configure.in.
<screen>
VERSION="2.6.9"
VER_MAJOR=2
VER_MINOR=6
VER_REVISION=9
VER_SVN=0
REL_STRING="Build from SVN snapshot on April  9, 2017"
</screen>
In the README file you have to update version number and date. Add some
information about new features if necessary.
<screen>
Bochs x86 Pentium+ Emulator
Updated: Sun Apr  9 08:45:00 CEST 2017
Version: 2.6.9
</screen>
In the file <filename>bochs.manifest</filename> you have to update the version
number for the Windows build.
<screen>
  version="2.6.9.0"
</screen>
Check date, update/sumup info in CHANGES. Run autoconf to regenerate configure and check them in.
Create an SVN tag that contains all files of the revision that was used in the release.
For prereleases I create a normal SVN tag like this:
<screen>
  svn mkdir tags/REL_2_5_pre1_FINAL
  svn copy trunk/bochs tags/REL_2_5_pre1_FINAL/bochs
  svn commit
</screen>
But for a real release, I make an SVN branch tag AND a normal tag.
<screen>
  svn mkdir tags/REL_2_5_FINAL
  svn copy trunk/bochs tags/REL_2_5_FINAL/bochs
  svn mkdir branches/REL_2_5
  svn copy trunk/bochs branches/REL_2_5/bochs
  svn commit
</screen>
The tag marks where the branch split off of the main trunk.
This is very useful in maintaining the branch since you can do diffs
against it.
<screen>
   svn diff tags/REL_2_5_FINAL/bochs trunk/bochs
   svn diff tags/REL_2_5_FINAL/bochs branches/REL_2_5
   etc.
</screen>
All bugfix-only releases after the final release should be created from the REL_2_5 branch.
Now you can start building packages with the sources from the created release tag.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Anonymous SVN checkout and platform-independent sources</title>
<para>
An anonymous SVN checkout from the release tag is the base for all official
release packages. Do this checkout from the release tag and specify a not yet
existing directory name with the version number as the destination. Then create
the source package from this new directory. These steps can be done both on
Linux and Windows (Cygwin).
<screen>
  svn co http://svn.code.sf.net/p/bochs/code/tags/REL_2_5_FINAL/bochs bochs-2.5
  tar czvf bochs-2.5.tar.gz --exclude=.svn bochs-2.5
</screen>
The source TAR file bochs-2.5.tar.gz is ready for upload.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Building the release on Linux</title>
<para>
The RPM will be building using the configuration in .conf.linux with
a few parameters from <command>build/redhat/make-rpm</command>. Make any last
minute changes to .conf.linux. Any changes will go into the source RPM. The
DLX Linux demo package will be downloaded from the Bochs website to the Bochs
root directory if it is not already present there.
<screen>
  ./build/redhat/make-rpm | tee ../build.txt
</screen>
This produces two rpm files in the current directory. Test and upload.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Building the release on win32</title>
<para>
These instructions require cygwin and MSVC++. Use the Bochs sources from
the SVN checkout or unpack the TAR file.
</para>
<para>
In Cygwin:
<screen>
  sh .conf.win32-vcpp         # runs configure
  make win32_snap             # unzip workspace, make a win32 source ZIP
</screen>
The source ZIP is present in the parent directory of the Bochs root and now
ready for upload. To build the binary package, copy it to a Windows machine,
if necessary.
</para>
<para>
Open up Visual C++ and load the workspace file Bochs.sln.  Check
the Build:Set Active Project Configuration is set the way you want it.
For releases I use "Win32 Release".
</para>
<para>
To create "bochsdbg.exe" with Bochs debugger support, manually change these
lines in config.h to turn on the debugger and the enhanced debugger gui.
<screen>
#define BX_DEBUGGER 1
#define BX_DISASM 1
#define BX_DEBUGGER_GUI 1
</screen>
One of the optimization features must be turned off, since it is currently
not compatible with the debugger.
<screen>
#define BX_SUPPORT_HANDLERS_CHAINING_SPEEDUPS 0
</screen>
VC++ will rebuild Bochs with debugger and overwrite bochs.exe.  To avoid
trashing the non-debug version, move it out of the way while the debugger
version is being built.  Then rename the debugger version to bochsdbg.exe.
<screen>
  cd obj-release
  mv bochs.exe bochs-normal.exe
  (build again with BX_DEBUGGER=1 this time)
  mv bochs.exe bochsdbg.exe
  mv bochs-normal.exe bochs.exe
</screen>
</para>
<para>
Do make <emphasis>install_win32</emphasis> into the NSIS folder in the Bochs
source tree:
<screen>
  make install_win32 INSTDIR=./build/win32/nsis/bochs-2.5
</screen>
This downloads and unpacks both the DLX Linux demo and the HTML docs from the
Bochs website, copies all the files into <emphasis>./build/win32/nsis/bochs-2.5</emphasis>
and then creates a binary ZIP file in the NSIS folder.
</para>
<para>
Now make the NSIS installer package (the current script is known to work with NSIS 3.04)
<screen>
  cd build/win32/nsis
  make
</screen>
That gives an installer called <filename>Bochs-2.5.exe</filename>. Test and upload it.
</para>
</section>

<section><title>Creating a file release and uploading files on SF</title>
<para>
When you are ready with creating release packages you have to upload them using
the SF file manager feature. Create a subdirectory with the version number in
the <filename>bochs</filename> directory. Point the download destination to the
new directory and start uploading packages. The top of the <filename>CHANGES</filename>
file should be used as the release notes. After setting up the file properties the
new release is ready for download.
</para>
<para>
After having all files set up in the download area, don't forget to post an announcement
containing a brief summary of changes to the bochs-announce mailing list and the "Project
News" section on SF.
</para>
</section>

</section>

</chapter>

<chapter id="webmastering"><title>Webmastering</title>

<section id="project-webspace"><title>Bochs project webspace</title>
<para>
The Bochs project webspace is stored under the SF directory <filename>/home/project-web/bochs</filename>.
It can be accessed from the SF shell using SSH or with the commands <command>sftp</command>,
<command>scp</command> and <command>rsync</command>. Some parts of the directory
structure must be updated from the local CVS repository, others from Bochs SVN
(directories <filename>bochs</filename> and <filename>sfsite</filename>).
The online documentation, disk images and screenshots must be uploaded manually.
<table>
<title>Directory structure</title>
<tgroup cols="2">
<thead>
<row>
<entry>Location</entry>
<entry>Meaning</entry>
</row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row><entry>cgi-bin</entry><entry>CGI scripts for the website</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs</entry><entry>root directory of the website</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/doc/docbook</entry><entry>Bochs online documentation</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/docs-html</entry><entry>old Bochs documentation</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/guestos</entry><entry>disk images directly stored on the Bochs website</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/screenshot</entry><entry>screenshots of Bochs running several guest operating systems</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/svn-snapshot</entry><entry>link to current snapshot</entry></row>
<row><entry>htdocs/techspec</entry><entry>technical specifications of several hardware components</entry></row>
<row><entry>lxr</entry><entry>Bochs source browser</entry></row>
<row><entry>sfsite-cvsroot</entry><entry>local CVS repository</entry></row>
<row><entry>sitebin</entry><entry>shell scripts (e.g. for snapshot generation)</entry></row>
<row><entry>siteman</entry><entry>website manual pages</entry></row>
<row><entry>snapshot</entry><entry>SVN snapshot storage area</entry></row>
<row><entry>tmp</entry><entry>temp directory for shell scripts</entry></row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</table>
</para>
</section>

<section id="update-website"><title>Updating the Bochs website content</title>
<para>
The main HTML content of the Bochs website (except online documentation) is stored
in the <filename>sfsite</filename> directory of the Bochs SVN repository. Unlike
other SF projects you don't need to upload these files to the Bochs project webspace.
Running a simple SVN update on the SF shell is enough after the files have been
updated in the repository. Please see <link linkend="svn-write-access-setup">Setting
up SVN write access</link> for general instructions. The only difference is the
directory name <filename>sfsite</filename> instead of <filename>bochs</filename>.
The example below shows how to start the SF shell with SSH and to update the
HTML files.
<screen>
ssh -t vruppert,bochs@shell.sourceforge.net create
vruppert,bochs@shell.sourceforge.net's password:

Requesting a new shell for "vruppert" and waiting for it to start.
queued... starting...

This is an interactive shell created for user vruppert,bochs.
Use the "timeleft" command to see how much time remains before shutdown.
Use the "shutdown" command to destroy the shell before the time limit.
For path information and login help, type "sf-help".

[vruppert@shell-24002 ~]$ svnserve -d -r /home/svn/p/bochs/code
[vruppert@shell-24002 ~]$ cd /home/project-web/bochs/htdocs/
[vruppert@shell-24002 htdocs]$ svn update
U    index.html
Updated to revision 10752
[vruppert@shell-24002 htdocs]$ shutdown
Requesting that your shell be shut down.
This request will be processed soon.
[vruppert@shell-24002 htdocs]$
Broadcast message from root (Mon Oct 31 09:45:04 2011):

The system is going down for system halt NOW!
Connection to shell-24002 closed by remote host.
Connection to shell-24002 closed.
Connection to shell.sourceforge.net closed.
</screen>
</para>
</section>

<section id="update-svn-snapshot"><title>Updating the SVN snapshot</title>
<para>
The SVN snapshot
<footnote>
<para>The SVN snapshot link can be found on the bottom of the page
<filename>getcurrent.html</filename>.</para>
</footnote>
can be updated with SF shell access using SSH. There is a script
called <command>update-svn-snapshot.sh</command> that can do all the required steps
(checking out SVN, packing the source tree into one archive, updating the website
link). See previous section how to create a shell.
<screen>
cd /home/project-web/bochs/sitebin/
./update-svn-snapshot.sh
</screen>
</para>
</section>

<section id="update-online-docs"><title>Updating the online documentation</title>
<para>
To update the online documentation, a file called <filename>bochsdoc.tar.gz</filename>
must be generated with the <command>make</command>. This file must be uploaded
to the location of the online documentation on SF using <command>scp</command>.
<screen>
cd doc/docbook
make bochsdoc.tar.gz
scp bochsdoc.tar.gz vruppert,bochs@web.sf.net:htdocs/doc/docbook
</screen>
After a successful upload, the HTML files must be unpacked from the SF shell.
See section <link linkend="update-website">Updating the Bochs website content</link>
how to create a shell.
<screen>
cd /home/project-web/bochs/htdocs/doc/docbook
tar xvzf bochsdoc.tar.gz
</screen>
The updated files can be accessed from the sidebar of the Bochs website.
</para>
</section>

      <section id="other-content"><title>other content</title>
      <para>
      &FIXME; sources, tmp
      </para>
      </section>

      <section id="available-tools"><title>available tools</title>
      <para>
      &FIXME; sources, tmp
      </para>
      </section>

</chapter>
</book>
